---
layout: post
title: Why we chose Holacracy for an indie VR game studio?
date: 2017-04-11 13:32:20 +0300
description: A short story on why we chose Holacracy for Hack and Paint # Add post description (optional)
img: holacracy-banner.png # Add image post (optional)
fig-caption: # Add figcaption (optional)
tags: [Holacracy, Management, Self-Management, VR, Games]
---
(*This article was originaly published on the Hack and Paint blog*)

We started **Hack and Paint** in late 2016, but we have been thinking about how
to structure the company at least 4 years prior to that. All of us are veterans
from the movie, animation and games industry. We have worked together in some of
the most prestigious and loved companies in the world like **Pixar, Blue Sky Studios,
Ubisoft, MPC, EA Games, Rhythm and Hues**, and many others! Through the years,
we observed how these studios are structured, what their culture is like and
really wanted to improve upon what they have built in terms of organizational
structure and culture.

![]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/studios-team.png)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Companies and projects the Hack and Paint founders have been part of</span>

In the past year we have been criticized about one fact — that we spent way too
much time on building the company structure and culture, instead of focusing on
the product itself, which for a game studio is the game we are currently making.
I know why so many people are criticizing us about this, after all, the easiest
approach for building any startup is — build and validate your product, fast.
The structure and the company culture doesn’t really matter that much — that
will “happen” anyway. Or at least that’s what most startups think. The fact is,
to make a successful company, both aspects are really important. You can’t have
a sustainable business without a product-market fit. That’s a given. However,
the problem is, even if you do have a product-market fit, it’s only a short term
success and potentially a very painful one. Or the way the Asana founders talk
about it — **“Companies that are succeeding with a more mercenary model are
succeeding in spite of it, not because of it.”** —
[https://www.fastcompany.com/3069240/how-asana-built-the-best-company-culture-in-tech](https://www.fastcompany.com/3069240/how-asana-built-the-best-company-culture-in-tech)

Since the beginning, our aim was to create the perfect company, regardless of
the product we make. After all, whatever product a company is developing, there
is always a team of people behind the scenes doing all the work. The
product-market fit is just something that other people desire, which the startup
team can provide. A functioning team can make any product. However a product
alone, cannot create and sustain a functioning team. So we invested in creating
the best studio culture, combined with the best structure and workflow, that
helps us achieve our purpose and finally a product — creating successful, fun,
VR games. I think Simon Sinek nailed it in his book [“Start with
Why”](https://www.startwithwhy.com/). We really started with the “Why we exist”
question in the first place. Then we moved to the “How” as in “How do we work
together”, and finally we came to the “What” question with “What game are we
making?”

The reasons we chose this route, instead of the easier, more traditional
approach, was to improve upon a few areas that we believe most studios struggle
with:

1.  Better understanding of the company purpose and why the studio exists in the
first place.
1.  Better understanding of what each person in the studio is responsible for
exactly.
1.  Easy way to change how the company and the team operates without the need to go
through a lot of politics and meetings.
1.  Employees feeling disengaged from work or from the project.
1.  Lack of innovation.

Note: if you are looking to find a silver bullet for all this, I have to say we
haven’t found it. But we believe we are on the right track. We are focusing on
two areas which we believe are important to get right in order for these
challenges to disappear — the structure of the company and the mindset of the
people in this different organizational structure.

### The Studio Structure

When it comes to studio organizations, the prevalent model is hierarchical. The
studios are usually divided into departments (e.g. “Modeling Department”,
“Animation Department”), which are focused on one part of the whole production
pipeline. In the upper example — the Modeling Department is responsible for
creating the models of the characters and the sets in the games or movies. Then
we have supervisors and production managers per department, making sure the
communication inside and outside of the department is clear with everyone in the
production team. Then the artists in a department are usually divided into
junior, senior and lead artists depending on their seniority and
responsibilities.

![]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/holacracy-hierarchy.png)

To begin with, we wanted a way to spread that power we usually see at the top of
the pyramid, into multiple roles and circles throughout the whole company. We
chose Holacracy as a system, but there are may different ways of achieving the
same. For more on that topic, read Frederic Laloux’s book [“Reinventing
Organizations”](http://www.reinventingorganizations.com/). In effect, the
traditional management paradigm and parent-child relationship, is replaced with
self-management and partner-partner relationship. Everyone is free and liberated
to take the initiative and start a project and everyone can change how the
company works. The alignment between partners is far better than in a
traditional hierarchical system. And there is a much clearer understanding
around what each of us is supposed to be doing as part of this system, without
the need of supervisors or project managers.

### Our Mindset

This all sounds good, except that not everyone is able to work in such a way
which was the big surprise for us. We thought that given the choice, everyone on
this earth will prefer to work in this new and exciting way. Now we understand
this is not true, but at the beginning we were quite shocked by this fact.
Although there is a much bigger responsibility placed on each of us, we have a
greater impact on the whole picture, compared to a traditional organization. The
work that is usually done by managers is now spread among all of us. In essence,
we are all managers in our domain and expertise. But in my opinion, the biggest
challenge comes from the fact that our mindset is too fixed on the
“parent-child” relationship that we experience throughout our lives. We are
supervisors, leads, senior or junior artists, CEOs, bosses, founders, employees,
temp employees, freelancers etc. Even the words convey some kind of hierarchical
structure. So our mindset is such that if we hold a certain position we are
either the child or the parent. I expect my supervisor to take care of my
problems. I`m also used to that feeling that she will protect me. She also
expects that if a problem occurs I will tell her that, and she will be able to
help me. This mindset is so ingrained that it’s really hard to get rid of.<br>
Systems like Holacracy replace that “parent-child” relationship with an
“adult-adult” or “partner-partner” relationships. Even the Holacracy
Constitution specifically refers to “partners” and not “employees”, but only a
shift in the names we use for things is not enough. The biggest shift is when
our mindset changes. That’s a very hard thing to do, requires a lot of time and
effort, and this is where the challenge begins.

There are many emerging tools and processes, which are aimed at startups and
facilitating these new working styles. Agile, Kan-Ban, Slack, Git, to name a
few, as well as inspiring and thought provoking programs like the [Tuff
Leadership Training,](http://tuffleadershiptraining.com) aimed at teaching and
developing a new generations of leaders. Ultimately however, it is down to the
people who are committed to nurturing this new style of working, and their
dedication to breaking habits that have been ingrained over the years, in an
effort to find a better way to do what they love, every day.
