---
layout: post
title: Rewards, Punishments, and Cabbage
date: 2017-12-19 13:32:20 +0300
description: How decision making works in companies
img: cabbage.jpg # Add image post (optional)
fig-caption: # Add figcaption (optional)
tags: [NVC, Rewards, Management]
---

Yesterday we had an argument with my wife. We started mildly, then it became
more heated, and then it quickly escalated because we were bringing in different
issues in the conversations one after the other, blaming each other for all
kinds of stuff that didn’t even have anything to do with the original
conversation! And I kid you not, we originally started arguing over a cabbage. A
cabbage!!! Yeah, I know you are smiling and laughing, but you have been in this
situation before. I know, because we all have. Welcome to the club.

So I had a day to recover from the cabbage conversation. I started thinking why
a small issue around cabbage (and you can substitute “cabbage” with
“toothpaste”, “dishes”, “toilet seat position”, etc.) can lead to such a heated
debate about everything else. Here is why. It affects how we work in our work
environment, how we interact with our teammates, with our family and loved ones,
it affects our whole life.

When someone accuses us of something, we interpret this as an attack and
accusation, we raise our guards and try to defend ourselves. It’s quite natural.
So when someone attacks us or blames us, what do we do? We attack back! And we
go into this neverending spiral of the game called “Who is right”. “It’s a game
where everybody loses” — says [Marshall
Rosenberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7TONauJGfc). So why our default
reaction as humans is to return the attack in the first place. Because since
very young we have been thought to do so. The whole society does something very
sinister and doesn’t even realize it. When we are little we are told to
“behave”. If we don’t behave, we get punished. If we behave, we get rewarded.
Then we go to schools where if you get the right answer, you are rewarded. If
you get the wrong answer, you are punished. Then we go to work. The same thing —
you perform well — a bonus. You don’t perform well — no bonus. Punishments and
rewards. Likes and dislikes. All day, every day. That’s how we are raised,
that’s what we are taught, so when someone is wrong — what do we do? Yes, we
punish him for being wrong. What do we do with the guy that doesn’t signal a
left turn with his car in front of us? We punish him with a middle finger. Why?
Because he’s wrong. And we are right.

![]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/medals.jpg)

To show you how engraved this idea of punishments and rewards is in our daily
lives and especially in our corporate environments, I will tell you another
story. There was a really nice company I was working for, but it had some issues
around teamwork and disengagement. To battle those issues the management team
decided to implement a process that each department had to adopt. Each month,
the best-performing employee of that department is given a Pink Bunny. No, not a
real one, just a plush toy. The employee that received the Bunny the previous
month nominates the person that will receive the Bunny in the current month and
so on. Basically, we were told that we will rotate the ownership of the Bunny
each month. If you think that this process strangely resembles “The employee of
the month” photos of bored employees that you see hanging on the walls of some
big old corporations, then you are not alone in thinking that. Here is what this
process actually achieved. We were having our department meeting and someone had
to be awarded the Pink Bunny for the first time. One of our best teammates
received it, it was kind of obvious that he will get it because he really is a
smart and great guy. But the air in the room felt very awkward that time. The
whole room clapped for the winner, but I can guarantee you — everyone thought to
themselves, even for a split second — “Why it wasn’t me?” “Am I not good
enough?”, “What should I do to get it next month?”, “I thought my contributions
to the team are equally relevant”. Because it doesn’t matter if it’s a big fat
check bonus or a Pink Bunny. We interpret this as a reward for behavior. And if
you think in this situation there are no punishments so employees shouldn’t feel
bad, then think about how would you feel if you don’t receive a reward. You feel
punished for not having received the reward. [Rewards are just the opposite side
of the Punishment
coin](https://www.amazon.com/Punished-Rewards-Trouble-Incentive-Praise/dp/0618001816).
And it gets even worse — the behavioral reward is individual. It doesn’t reward
the whole team for an achievement, it rewards a single individual. Who in their
right mind will implement such a process to combat the disengagement from
teamwork and individualism in a company? That’s like adding oil to the fire. Not
only this will not fix the teamwork problems, it will actually worsen them.
Needless to say, this Pink Bunny initiative didn’t last for very long.

As you see, if we are taught the same pattern since very little, it will be
difficult to do something else, because it is really engraved in our default
behavior. What Marshall Rosenberg teaches in “Nonviolent Communication” is that
to get out of this vicious cycle, we need to start thinking in terms of feelings
and needs. The same goes for team behaviors. If we want the team we manage to do
something, the wrong way to go about it is to implement some rewards and
punishment program. The right way to go about it is to tell the team what we
actually want from them. Sounds very obvious, but believe me, it’s harder than
it seems. Too often team leaders are either “too nice” — they don’t tell it as
it is in fear of hurting someone’s feelings or “too demanding” — not asking for
requests, but making demands. And what is the difference between requests and
demands? Requests usually don’t come with rewards or punishments. Demands
actually do.

So if we want healthy work environments, let’s get rid of this nonsense of
rewards and punishments. It just reinforces this constant loop. [There is just
too much data already that this doesn’t work.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rrkrvAUbU9Y)
